The Tutinama is a collection of stories, otherwise known as Tales of a Parrot, that
is believed to be one of the earliest known Mughal transcripts. This story was
commissioned to be written by Akbar, the third ruler of the Mughal empire and a
major player in the development of the Mughal style itself. The story is a frame
narrative. The main story follows a woman called Khojisteh and her parrot who
tells her tales all night long to distract her from being unfaithful to her husband
who is abroad. On this particular evening when the skies are dark and Khojisteh
is becoming restless, the parrot brings up the story of the syagoash, and
Khojisteh demands to know the rest of the fascinating tale. The parrot tells her of
a lion who lives in the desert and his friend, a monkey. The lion had to temporarily
leave his dwelling, and left the monkey to keep guard of it. While the lion was gone,
a group of fiesty syagoash took a liking to his humble dwelling and decide to take it
over, much to the monkey's dismay. Gesturing with his arms, the monkey explains
the lion will be returning soon and will not be pleased with them taking over his
dwelling. Once the syagoash have discussed amongst one another, the male decides
he will come up with a plan to deceive the lion and drive him away so they can keep
the dwelling for themselves after all. As the lion returns down the sloping hill, the
monkey concernedly warns him of the syagoash who have overtaken his dwelling,
and the lion fearfully decides to confront them. Once they see the lion coming, the
syagoash come up with their plot to trick him. The male tells the female to quickly
make all of their babies cry. As the lion is right near the entrance, he can hear the
crying of the babies. The syagoash loudly announce that their babies are crying
because they are so hungry for fresh lion meat, but not to worry because they had
heard a lion would be coming to the area for them to feast on. The lion hears this
and becomes very alarmed, and so he flees back to the monkey to tell him what
danger he is in. After the lion explains what happened, the monkey assures him that
the syagoash are only trying to trick him and that their words have absolutely no
merit. Trusting in his friend, the Lion decides to return once again to his dwelling.
As the lion gingerly approaches, the same thing happens with the loud cries of the
babies. The syagoash repeat their story, but this time they add in that their new
'friend' the monkey has promised to help them trick the lion by assuring him he
is safe and getting him to return to the dwelling. Hearing about this betrayal, The
lion becomes enraged. Forgetting about the dwelling and syagoash altogether,
he barrels toward the monkey. He grabs him and tears him to pieces. The lion
runs away from the dwelling, never to be seen again and the sneaky syagoash
get their way. After the parrot finishes telling the story, he looks to Khojisteh and
says “Arise and go to your lover”. But The sun has begun to rise and the birds have
begun to chirp. And Khojisteh realizes she cannot pursue a lover in the light of day,
for she might get caught, so she stays in her home. Yet again, the parrot has
prevented her from being unfaithful to her husband. But How many more nights will
he be able to distract Khojisteh?